---
name: Creating Components
description: Components are the basic building blocks of all Aurelia applications. In this article you'll learn how to build basic components using dependency injection and the component lifecycle.
author: Rob Eisenberg (http://robeisenberg.com)
---
## Creating A Component

In Aurelia, user interface components are composed of _view_ and _view-model_ pairs. The view is written with HTML and is rendered into the DOM. The view-model is written with ${context.language.name} and provides data and behavior to the view. The Templating Engine along with Dependency Injection are responsible for creating these pairs and enforcing a predictable lifecycle for the component. Once instantiated, Aurelia's powerful _databinding_ links the two pieces together allowing changes in your view-model to be reflected in the view and changes in your view to reflected in your view-model. This Separation of Concerns is great for developer/designer collaboration, maintainability, architectural flexibility, and even source control.

To create a UI component, you need only create two files, one for each of the component parts. Let's create a simple "Hello" component. To do that we'll need a _hello${context.language.fileExtension}_ for our view-model and _hello.html_ for our view. Here's the source for each:

```JavaScript hello.js
export class Hello {
  constructor() {
    this.firstName = 'John';
    this.lastName = 'Doe';
  }

  sayHello() {
    alert(`Hello ${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}. Nice to meet you.`);
  }
}
```
```TypeScript hello.ts [variant]
export class Hello {
  firstName: string = 'John';
  lastName: string = 'Doe';

  sayHello() {
    alert(`Hello ${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}. Nice to meet you.`);
  }
}
```

```HTML hello.html
<template>
  <input value.bind="firstName">
  <input value.bind="lastName">

  <button click.trigger="sayHello()">Say Hello</button>
</template>
```

Notice that the view-model is a plain class. There's nothing remarkable about it. One of the strengths of Aurelia is that you can write so much of your application in vanilla JS.

Also, notice how the view is wrapped in a Web Components HTMLTemplateElement. All views use standards-based HTML templates. You can also see the very simple, easy-to remember binding language. Simply append `.bind` to any HTML attribute in the DOM, and Aurelia will bind it to the corresponding property in your view-model.

The `.bind` binding command configures the "default binding behavior" for the attribute. For most attributes, this is a `one-way` binding, where data updates only flow in one direction: from the view-model to the view. However, usually, the behavior you want for form controls is `two-way` binding so that data not only flows from your view-model into your view, but user input in the view flows back into your view-model.

Those are the defaults, but you can always be explicit about the binding direction by using `.one-way`, `two-way` or `.one-time` in place of `.bind` (`.one-time` renders the initial value of the property but does not perform synchronization thereafter, making it a nice memory and performance gain for data you know will not change).

In addition to binding HTML attributes, you can also bind events. Any event, either native or custom, can be bound using `.trigger` this causes the expression to be invoked when the indicated event is fired.

> Info
> You can read more about data binding in the various Binding articles.

Now you know how to build basic components. What's great about this knowledge? It's consistent throughout Aurelia. The same pattern as above is used to create your app's root component, screens that the router navigates to, custom elements, dynamically composed UI components, modal dialogs, etc.

## Component Instantiation Through Dependency Injection (DI)

View-models and other interface elements, such as Custom Elements and Custom Attributes, are created as classes which are instantiated by the framework using a dependency injection container. Code written in this style is easy to modularize and test. Rather than creating large classes, you can break things down into small objects that collaborate to achieve a goal. The DI can then put the pieces together for you at runtime.

In order to leverage DI, you simply decorate your class to tell the framework what it should pass to its constructor. Here's an example of a CustomerDetail component that depends on Aurelia's fetch client.

```JavaScript customer-detail.js
import {inject} from 'aurelia-framework';
import {HttpClient} from 'aurelia-fetch-client';

@inject(HttpClient)
export class CustomerDetail {
  constructor(http) {
    this.http = http;
  }
}
```
```TypeScript customer-detail.ts [variant]
import {autoinject} from 'aurelia-framework';
import {HttpClient} from 'aurelia-fetch-client';

@autoinject
export class CustomerDetail {
  constructor(private http: HttpClient) {}
}
```

* If you are using ES2016, use the `inject` decorator. It should pass a list of types to provide instances of. There should be one argument for each constructor parameter. In the above example, we needed an HttpClient instance, so we added the `HttpClient` type in the `inject` decorator and then added a corresponding parameter in the constructor.
* If you are sticking with ES2015, or don't want to use decorators, you can also add a static `inject` method to the class that returns an array of types to inject.
* If you are using TypeScript >= 1.5, you can add the `@autoinject` decorator to your class and leave out the Types in the decorator call, but just use them on the constructor's signature.

## The Component Lifecycle

Every component instance has a lifecycle that you can tap into. This makes it easy for you to perform various actions at particular times. For example, you may want to execute some code as soon as your component properties are bound, but before the component is first rendered. Or, you may want to run some code to manipulate the DOM as soon as possible after your element is attached to the document. Below is a summary of the various lifecycle callbacks that you can hook into in your component.

| Lifecycle Callback | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| `constructor` | When the framework instantiates a component, it calls your class's constructor, just like any JavaScript class. This is the best place to put basic initialization code that is not dependent on bindable properties. |
| `created` | The "created" hook runs just after the constructor and can be treated very similarly. The only difference is that the component's `Controller` has been instantiated and is accessible through the `$controller` property, for advanced scenarios. |
| `bind`    | If your component has a method named "bind", then the framework will invoke it when it has begun binding values to your bindable properties. In terms of the component hierarchy, the bind hooks execute top-down, from parent to child, so your bindables will have their values set by the owning components, but the bindings in your view are not yet set. This is a good place to perform any work or make changes to anything that your view would depend on because data still flows down synchronously. This is the best time to do anything that might affect children as well. |
| `attached` | If your component has a method named "attached", then the framework will invoke it when it has fully attached your HTML element to the document, along with its children. In terms of the component hierarchy, the attached hooks execute top-down. |
| `detached` | If your component has a method named "detached", then the framework will invoke it when it has fully removed your HTML element from the document. In terms of the component hierarchy, the detached hooks execute bottom-up. |
| `unbind` | If your component has a method named "unbind", then the framework will invoke it when it has fully disconnected bindings from your component. In terms of the component hierarchy, the unbind hooks execute bottom-up. |

To tap into any of these hooks, simply implement the method on your class.

<div style="border: thick solid red; border-radius: 12px; padding: 16px;">
<span style="text-align: center; font-size: 16pt;"><b>TODO</b></span>
These have value, providing the method signatures, the new v2 documentation does not. I'm not sure if that is intentional or whether the signatures have changed.
</div>

2. `created(owningView: View, myView: View)` - If the view-model implements the `created` callback it is invoked next. At this point in time, the view has also been created and both the view-model and the view are connected to their controller. The created callback will receive the instance of the "owningView". This is the view that the component is declared inside of. If the component itself has a view, this will be passed second.
3. `bind(bindingContext: Object, overrideContext: Object)` - Databinding is then activated on the view and view-model. If the view-model has a `bind` callback, it will be invoked at this time. The "binding context" to which the component is being bound will be passed first. An "override context" will be passed second. The override context contains information used to traverse the parent hierarchy and can also be used to add any contextual properties that the component wants to add.

Every lifecycle callback is optional. Implement whatever makes sense for your component, but don't feel obligated to implement any of them if they aren't needed for your scenario. Some of the lifecycle callbacks make sense to implement in pairs (`bind/unbind`, `attached/detached`) in order to clean up any resources you have allocated. If you registered a listener or subscriber remember to remove them.

[Aurelia Lifecycle Demo](https://codesandbox.io/embed/aurelia-lifecycle-demo-yy1tc?expanddevtools=1&autoresize=1&fontsize=18&hidenavigation=1&module=%2Fsrc%2Fapp.html&view=preview)

> Info
> It is important to note that if you implement the `bind` callback function, then the property changed callbacks for any `bindable` properties will not be called when the property value is initially set. The changed callback will be called for any subsequent time the bound value changes.

