---
name: "Templating: Custom Elements Basics"
description: An overview of the Aurelia templating engine's custom element functionality basics. Custom Elements are used to add custom components to Aurelia applications.
author: Ashley Grant (http://www.ashleygrant.com)
---
## Introduction

Custom elements are the primary tool an Aurelia application developer will utilize for componentizing an application.

## HTML Only Custom Element

The simplest way to create an Aurelia custom element is to create an Aurelia view template in an HTML file and then require it in to another Aurelia view template. HTML only custom elements are a highly useful strategy for dealing with functionality that has no need for ViewModel logic but is likely to be reused. The element name will be the same as the HTML file name, without the extension. When requiring an HTML only custom element in to a view, you must include the `.html` extension.  It is even possible to create bindable properties for an HTML only custom element by putting a comma separated list of property names on the `bindable` attribute of the `template` element. The Aurelia convention of converting camelCase bindable properties to dash-case applies to properties provided to the `bindable` attribute, as shown in the following example.

```HTML hello-world.html
<template bindable="firstName, lastName">
  Hello, ${firstName} ${lastName}!
</template>
```

```HTML app.html
<template>
  <require from="./hello-world.html"></require>

  <hello-world first-name="Albert" last-name="Einstein"></hello-world>
</template>
```

HTML only custom elements may require in other custom elements and attributes as well as utilizing any other view resource just like any other Aurelia component may. HTML only custom elements also support explicit two-way databinding for properties, though it is not possible to create properties that default to two-way databinding with HTML only custom elements. For that type of functionality, you will need to provide a ViewModel for your custom element.

The following example shows an Aurelia view utilizing two-way databinding to an example HTML only custom element. The example HTML only custom element itself requires in other custom elements, and utilizes two-way databinding to those custom elements. Note that it is possible to use the full power of Aurelia's templating engine from an HTML custom element, such as using the `debounce` binding behavior.

```HTML app.html
<template>
  <require from="./example.html"></require>

  Hello, ${guest}!
  <example name.two-way="guest"></example>
</template>
```

```HTML example.html
<template bindable="name">
  <require from="./yes-or-no.html"></require>
  <require from="./say-goodbye.html"></require>

  <p>What is your name? <input type="text" value.bind="name & debounce"></p>
  <yes-or-no question="Are you leaving?" answer.two-way="sayGoodbye"></yes-or-no>
  <say-goodbye if.bind="sayGoodbye" name.bind="name"></say-goodbye>
</template>
```

```HTML yes-or-no.html
<template bindable="question, answer">
  <p>
    ${question} <input type="checkbox" checked.bind="answer">
  </p>
</template>
```

```HTML say-goodbye.html
<template bindable="name">
  Goodbye, ${name}!
</template>
```

## Custom Element Basics

 Creating custom elements using Aurelia is extremely simple. Simply creating a JavaScript and HTML file pair with the same name is all that is necessary to create an Aurelia custom element. The HTML file must contain an Aurelia template wrapped in a `template` element. The JavaScript file must export a JavaScript class. Aurelia's standard naming convention for custom element VM classes is to append `CustomElement` to the end of the class name, e.g. `SecretMessageCustomElement`. Aurelia will take the JavaScript class name, strip `CustomElement` from the end, and convert it from InitCaps to dash-case for the custom element's name. Note that this means it is possible for the custom element name to not match the file name. Thus, it is recommended to name your custom element files to match the custom element name. It is acceptable to export more than one class from the JavaScript file for a custom element. Aurelia will use the first class exported from the file as the custom element's view-model (VM). Note that each instance of a custom element will receive its own separate VM instance.


Custom elements are not allowed to be self-closing. This means that `<secret-message />` will not work. When using a custom element, you must provide a closing tag as shown in `app.html` below.

> Info
> This is not a limitation of Aurelia. It is HTML5 who doesn't support self-closing syntax. Self-closing is a XML syntax, not HTML5. To be clear, you can use self-closing in SVG when it's embedded inside HTML page, because SVG is actually XML. When browser parses an embedded SVG inside HTML page, it uses XML parser to parse the SVG part.

```JavaScript secret-message.js
export class SecretMessageCustomElement {
  secretMessage = 'Be sure to drink your Ovaltine!';
}
```
```TypeScript secret-message.ts [variant]
export class SecretMessageCustomElement {
  secretMessage: string = 'Be sure to drink your Ovaltine!';
}
```

```HTML secret-message.html
<template>
  ${secretMessage}
</template>
```

```HTML app.html
<template>
  <require from="./secret-message"></require>

  And now, it's time for a secret message: <secret-message></secret-message>
</template>
```

It is also possible to explicitly name your custom element by using the `customElement` decorator on the VM class. Simply pass a string to this decorator with the exact name you wish to use for your custom element. Aurelia will not convert the string you pass it to dash-case. This means that `@customElement('SecretMessage')` is not converted to `secret-message` but to `secretmessage`. If any uppercase letters are passed to the decorator and development logging is enabled, Aurelia will log a message alerting you that it has lowercased the name. This is because the DOM is not case-sensitive. Thus you must be explicit about any dashes in the attribute name when using this decorator, e.g. `@customElement('secret-message')`.

Aurelia custom elements do not need to follow the naming conventions for Web Components custom elements. Namely, Aurelia allows you to create custom elements that do not have a dash in their name. This is because the Web Components specs reserve all single-word element names for the browser. Thus, you are free to create a `foo` custom element with Aurelia; however, it is recommended to refrain from creating single-world custom elements to avoid any chance of a possible naming clash in the future. Also, any Aurelia custom elements that are intended to be used as standalone Web Components custom elements MUST have a dash in their name.

Before we move on, let's discuss just how easy it is to create a custom element in Aurelia and the impact it has on Aurelia's naming conventions for custom element view-model classes. One capability of the Aurelia framework is that it can take components that were originally created for use as a page in an application and use them as custom elements. When this happens, Aurelia will use the component's VM class name, dash-case it and use that as the custom element's name. Let's say there is an Aurelia application that provides various pages, one of which is the `Contact` page. All it takes to use the `Contact` page as a custom element on any page in the application is to `require` it in to the view. At that point, it is available as the `contact` custom element in that view. It is even possible to provide bindable properties for the page that can be used when using the page as a custom element. This means that, if you wish, you may ignore the Aurelia naming convention for your custom elements. In the example above, we could have simply named the class `SecretMessage`. The custom element would still be named `secret-message`. Given this capability, it might be considered wise to utilize Aurelia's naming convention for custom elements or use the `customElement` decorator to be explicit when creating a component that is only meant to be used as a custom element and not as a standalone page.

## Bindable Properties

Any properties or functions of the VM class may be used for binding within the custom element's view; however, a custom element must specify the properties that will be bindable as attributes on the custom element. This is done by decorating each bindable property with the `bindable` decorator. The default binding mode for bindable properties is one-way. This means that a property value can be bound *in* to your custom element, but any changes the custom element makes to the property value will not be propogated *out* of the custom element. This default may be overridden, if needed, by passing a settings object to the `bindable` decorator with a property named `defaultBindingMode` set. This property should be set to one of the four `bindingMode` options: `oneTime`, `fromView`, `toView` / `oneWay`, or `twoWay`. Both `bindable` and `bindingMode` may be imported from the `aurelia-framework` module. Let's look at an example custom element with a bindable property that defaults to two-way binding.

```JavaScript secret-message.js
import {bindable, bindingMode} from 'aurelia-framework';

export class SecretMessageCustomElement {
  @bindable({ defaultBindingMode: bindingMode.twoWay }) message;
  @bindable allowDestruction = false;

  constructor() {
    setInterval(() => this.deleteMessage(), 10000);
  }

  deleteMessage() {
    if(this.allowDestruction === true) {
      this.message = '';
    }
  }
}
```
```TypeScript secret-message.ts [variant]
import {bindable, bindingMode} from 'aurelia-framework';

export class SecretMessageCustomElement {
  @bindable({ defaultBindingMode: bindingMode.twoWay }) message: string;
  @bindable allowDestruction: boolean = false;

  constructor() {
    setInterval(() => this.deleteMessage(), 10000);
  }

  deleteMessage() {
    if(this.allowDestruction === true) {
      this.message = '';
    }
  }
}
```

```HTML secret-message.html
<template>
  <p>
    Urgent, secret message: ${message}
  </p>
  <p>
    This message will ${allowDestruction === false ? 'not ' : '' } self-destruct in less than 10 seconds!
  </p>
</template>
```

```HTML app.html
<template>
  <require from="./secret-message"></require>

  <p>
    Secret Message: <input type="text" value.bind="message">
  </p>
  <p>
    Allow Message to Destruct? <input type="checkbox" checked.bind="allowDestruction">
  </p>
  <secret-message message.bind="message" allow-destruction.bind="allowDestruction" ></secret-message>
</template>
```

In this example, the `secret-message` custom element will check every ten seconds to see if it needs to destroy (set to an empty string) the message it receives via databinding. When told to destroy the message, Aurelia's databinding system will update the bound property of the component using the custom element, thanks to the custom element specifying that this property's default binding mode is two-way. Thus, the text box will be cleared when the message "self destructs."  Of course, the component using the custom element is free to override this default by explicitly specifying the binding direction via the `one-way`, `two-way`, or `one-time` binding commands.

Whether a secret message that is only shown to the person who writes the message is very useful is for you to decide.

## Declarative Computed Values

As your application grows, custom elements get complicated and often values that are computed based on other values start to appear. This can be handled either by creating getters in your custom element view model, or by using Aurelia's `let` element. You can think of `let` like a declaration in a JavaScript expression. For instance, a name tag form example might consist of two input fields with values bound to view model properties `firstName` and `lastName`, like the following:

```HTML Interpolation
<div>
  First name:
  <input value.bind="firstName">
  Last name:
  <input value.bind="lastName">
</div>
Full name is: "${firstName} ${lastName}"
```

Notice the expression `\${firstName} \${lastName}`. What if we want to use it somewhere else, or give it a more meaningful name like `fullName`? We have the option to react on change of either `firstName` or `lastName` and re-compute `fullName` in view model, or declare a getter that returns the combination of those values like the following examples:

```JavaScript Manual Computed
export class App {
  @bindable firstName;
  @bindable lastName;

  // Aurelia convention, called after firstName has changed
  firstNameChanged(newFirstName: string) {
    this.fullName = `${newFirstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }

  // Aurelia convention, called after firstName has changed
  lastNameChanged(newLastName: string) {
    this.fullName = `${this.firstName} ${newLastName}`;
  }
}

// Or with getter and `computedFrom` decorator
export class App {
  @bindable firstName;
  @bindable lastName;

  @computedFrom('firstName', 'lastName')
  get fullName() {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
}
```
```TypeScript Manual Computed [variant]
export class App {
  @bindable firstName: string;
  @bindable lastName: string;

  fullName: string;

  // Aurelia convention, called after firstName has changed
  firstNameChanged(newFirstName: string) {
    this.fullName = `${newFirstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }

  // Aurelia convention, called after firstName has changed
  lastNameChanged(newLastName: string) {
    this.fullName = `${this.firstName} ${newLastName}`;
  }
}

// Or with getter and `computedFrom` decorator
export class App {
  @bindable firstName: string;
  @bindable lastName: string;

  @computedFrom('firstName', 'lastName')
  get fullName() {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
}
```

Aurelia provides a simpler way to achieve the above result, with the more declarative `let` element. Using the `let` element, the above example would be rewritten as:

Either using interpolation:

```HTML Declarative Computed via Interpolation
<let full-name="${firstName} ${lastName}"></let>
<div>
  First name:
  <input value.bind="firstName">
  Last name:
  <input value.bind="lastName">
</div>
Full name is: "${fullName}"
```

Or an expression:

```HTML Declarative Computed via Expression
<let full-name.bind="firstName + ' ' + lastName"></let>
<div>
  First name:
  <input value.bind="firstName">
  Last name:
  <input value.bind="lastName">
</div>
Full name is: "${fullName}"
```

And now after either `firstName` or `lastName` has changed, `fullName` is recomputed automatically and is ready to be used in other parts of the view.

Additionally, if there is a need to react to changes on both `fullName`, we can specify a special attribute `to-binding-context` on the `<let></let>` element to notify bindings to assign the value to the binding context, which is your view model, instead of override context, which is your view.

```HTML Declarative Computed Context View
<let to-binding-context full-name="${firstName} ${lastName}"></let>
<div>
  First name:
  <input value.bind="firstName">
  Last name:
  <input value.bind="lastName">
</div>
Full name is: "${fullName}"
```

```JavaScript Declarative Computed Context View Model
export class App {
  @bindable firstName;
  @bindable lastName;

  @observable fullName;

  // Aurelia convention, called after fullName has changed
  fullNameNameChanged(fullName) {
    // Do stuff with new full name
  }
}
```
```TypeScript Declarative Computed Context View Model [variant]
export class App {
  @bindable firstName: string;
  @bindable lastName: string;

  @observable fullName: string;

  // Aurelia convention, called after fullName has changed
  fullNameNameChanged(fullName: string) {
    // Do stuff with new full name
  }
}
```

## Surrogate behaviors

Surrogate behaviors allow you to add attributes, event handlers, and bindings on the template element for a custom element. This can be extremely useful in many cases, but one particular area that it is helpful is with dealing with `aria` attributes to help add accessibility to your custom elements. When using surrogate behaviors, you add attributes to the template element for your custom element. These attributes will be placed on the custom element itself at runtime. For example, consider the view for a `my-button` custom element:

```HTML my-button.html
<template role="button">
  <div>My Button</div>
</template>
```

```HTML Template using my-button custom element
<template>
  <require from="my-button"></require>

  <my-button></my-button>
</template>
```

The `role="button"` attribute will automatically be set on the `my-button` element whenever it used in an Aurelia application. If you were to check your browser's Dev Tools while running a template that used the `my-buttom` custom element, you will see something that looks like the below

```HTML Template using my-button custom element
<my-button class="au-target" au-target-id="1" role="button">
  <div>My Button</div>
</my-button>
```

It is important to note that Surrogate Behaviors cannot be used with a custom element that is using the `@containerless` decorator discussed below as this decorator removes the wrapping custom element from the DOM, and thus there is nowhere for the Surrogate Behaviors to be placed.

## Basic Content Projection

So far, we've only talked about custom elements that look like `<custom-element attr.bind="vmProp"></custom-element>`. Now it's time to look at creating custom elements that have content inside them. Let's create a name tag custom element. When the `name-tag` element is used, it will take the name it will display as content in the element.

```HTML Custom Element Content Projection
<name-tag>
  Ralphie
</name-tag>
```

Aurelia custom elements utilize the "slot based" content projection standard from the Web Component specifications. Let's look at how this will work with our `name-tag` element. This custom element utilizes a single slot, so we simply need to add a `<slot></slot>` element in our template where we would like content to be projected.

```HTML name-tag.html
<template>
  <div class="header">
    Hello, my name is
  </div>
  <div class="name">
    <slot></slot>
  </div>
</template>
```

Aurelia will project the element's content in to the template where the `<slot></slot>` element is located.

## Decorators for Customizing Aurelia Custom Element Processing

There are lots of options that allow you to change how custom elements work. These are expressed by decorators added to the custom element's viewmodel or properties on the viewmodel.

* `@child(selector)` - Decorates a property to create a reference to a single immediate child content element.
* `@children(selector)` - Decorates a property to create an array of content elements that is automatically synchronized based on a DOM query selector against the element's immediate child content.
* `@processContent(false|Function)` - Tells the compiler that the element's content requires special processing. If you provide `false` to the decorator, the compiler will not process the content of your custom element. It is expected that you will do custom processing yourself. But, you can also supply a custom function that lets you process the content during the view's compilation. That function can then return true/false to indicate whether or not the compiler should also process the content. The function takes the following form `function(compiler, resources, node, instruction):boolean`
* `@useView(path)` - Specifies a different view to use.
* `@noView(dependencies?)` - Indicates that this custom element does not have a view and that the author intends for the element to handle its own rendering internally. This is extremely useful when "wrapping" legacy JavaScript widgets that programatically create their markup
* `@inlineView(markup, dependencies?)` - Allows the developer to provide a string that will be compiled into the view.
* `@useShadowDOM(options?: { mode: 'open' | 'closed' })` - Causes the view to be rendered in the ShadowDOM. When an element is rendered to ShadowDOM, a special `DOMBoundary` instance can optionally be injected into the constructor. This represents the shadow root.
* `@containerless()` - Causes the element's view to be rendered without the custom element container wrapping it. This cannot be used in conjunction with `@child`, `@children` or `@useShadowDOM` decorators. It also cannot be used with surrogate behaviors. Use sparingly.
* `@viewResources(...dependencies)` - Adds dependencies to the underlying View. Same as: `<require from="..."></require>`, but declared in the ViewModel. Arguments can either be strings with `moduleId`s, `Object`s with `src` and optionally `as` properties, or classes of the module to be included.

### Examples: Show me the code!!

The utility of some of these decorators is immediately evident from the description. However, that may not be the case for some of the more involved ones. Thus, in this section we would like to show some simple examples to portray the usefulness of some of these decorators. Some of these examples are even silly (why? for the sake of science!), but we trust you will find the proper use in your app.

#### Display a template fragment in your Aurelia app using `@processContent`, and `@noView`

Suppose we want to display the following template fragment in our app.

```HTML
<span>${message}</span>
```

A naive approach would be to use something like this:

```HTML app.html
<template>
  <pre>
    <code>
      &lt;span&gt;${message}&lt;/span&gt;
    </code>
  </pre>
</template>
```

However, with this code Aurelia will perform string interpolation for `\${message}`, and depending on whether or not the view-model has a `message` property, the app will display the value of `message` or nothing. But that is not what was intended. To show such code fragments, we can create a no-op custom element to wrap them.

```TypeScript CodeFragment.ts
// reference: https://stackoverflow.com/a/50066210/2270340
import { noView, processContent } from "aurelia-framework";

@noView()
@processContent(false)
export class CodeFragment {}
```

```HTML app.html
<template>
  <require from="./code-fragment"></require>
  <code-fragment>
    <pre>
      <code>
        &lt;span&gt;${message}&lt;/span&gt;
      </code>
    </pre>
  </code-fragment>
</template>
```

When Aurelia compiles the `code-fragment` part of the view it does not look for a view for `CodeFragment` as the class is decorated with `@noView()`. Also it does not process any content that comes between `<code-fragment>` and `</code-fragment>`, as instructed by `@processContent(false)`. You can see the result below.

[noView, processContent demo](https://codesandbox.io/embed/lpozx0vo2q?autoresize=1&codemirror=1&fontsize=18&hidenavigation=1&module=%2Fsrc%2Fcode-fragment.js&view=preview)

So, go ahead and create the documentation app you always wanted to have, to show-case the usage of your own custom element library.

#### Pretty looking templates for your Tabs control

When we want to create our own custom element for a Tabs control, it is much more compact and intuitive if we can use the element as follows:

```HTML
<tabs>
  <tab header="IMDB's Top 250 Movies">
    <ul>
      <li>The Shawshank Redemption</li>
      <li>The Godfather</li>
      <li>The Godfather: Part II</li>
      <li>The Dark Knight</li>
      <li>12 Angry Men</li>
      <li>...</li>
    </ul>
  </tab>
  <tab header="IMDB's Top 250 TV Shows">
    <ul>
      <li>Planet Earth II</li>
      <li>Band of Brothers</li>
      <li>Game of Thrones</li>
      <li>Planet Earth</li>
      <li>Breaking Bad</li>
      <li>...</li>
    </ul>
  </tab>
  <tab header="Recently Added">
    Nothing to see here.
  </tab>
</tabs>
```

In this way, the tab header and the respective content stay together. As a result, reordering the tabs becomes easier, without accidentally showing the wrong content under an unrelated header. However, the rendered DOM for such tabs is usually (refer [Bootstrap Tabs](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.2/components/navs/#javascript-behavior)) like the following, where we have a separate section for the tab header in form of a `ul>li` and a separate section for the content.

```HTML
<ul>
  <li><a>IMDB's Top 250 Movies</a></li>
  <li><a>IMDB's Top 250 TV Shows</a></li>
  <li><a>Recently Added</a></li>
</ul>
<div>
  <div>...</div>
  <div>...</div>
  <div>...</div>
</div>
```

We can use the `@processContent` decorator along with a function to achieve this. The following is a minimal implementation:

```HTML app.html
<template>
  <require from="./tabs"></require>
  <tabs>
    <tab header="Top Movies">
      <ul>
        <li>The Shawshank Redemption</li>
        <li>The Godfather</li>
        <li>The Godfather: Part II</li>
        <li>The Dark Knight</li>
        <li>12 Angry Men</li>
      </ul>
    </tab>
    <tab header="Top TV Shows">
      <ul>
        <li>Planet Earth II</li>
        <li>Band of Brothers</li>
        <li>Game of Thrones</li>
        <li>Planet Earth</li>
        <li>Breaking Bad</li>
      </ul>
    </tab>
    <tab header="Recently Added"> Nothing to see here. </tab>
  </tabs>
</template>
```

```HTML tabs.html
<template>
  <!-- Here we have 2 replaceable templates for header and content -->
  <div><template replaceable part="header"></template></div>
  <div><template replaceable part="content"></template></div>
</template>
```

```JavaScript tabs.js
import { bindable, BindingEngine, Container, processContent } from "aurelia-framework";

function processTabs(compiler, resources, node, instruction) {
  // first create 2 templates for the replaceable parts
  const headerTemplate = document.createElement("template");
  headerTemplate.setAttribute("replace-part", "header");
  const contentTemplate = document.createElement("template");
  contentTemplate.setAttribute("replace-part", "content");

  // process all tabs
  const tabs = Array.from(node.querySelectorAll("tab"));
  for (let i = 0; i < tabs.length; i++) {
    const tab = tabs[i];

    // add header
    const header = document.createElement("button");
    header.classList.add("btn", "btn-link");
    header.setAttribute("click.delegate", `showTab('${i}')`);
    header.innerText = tab.getAttribute("header");
    headerTemplate.content.appendChild(header);

    // add content
    const content = document.createElement("div");
    content.setAttribute("show.bind", `activeTabId=='${i}'`);
    content.append(...Array.from(tab.childNodes));
    contentTemplate.content.appendChild(content);

    node.removeChild(tab);
  }

  // Activate the first tab
  const bindingEngine = Container.instance.get(BindingEngine);
  instruction.attributes = {
    ...instruction.attributes,
    "active-tab-id": bindingEngine.createBindingExpression("activeTabId", "'0'")
  };

  node.append(headerTemplate, contentTemplate);
  return true;
}

@processContent(processTabs)
export class Tabs {
  @bindable activeTabId;
  showTab(tabId) {
    this.activeTabId = tabId;
  }
}
```
```TypeScript tabs.ts [variant]
import { BehaviorInstruction, bindable, BindingEngine, Container, processContent } from "aurelia-framework";

@processContent(Tabs.processTabs)
export class Tabs {
  // A static method in the custom element class itself is more compact than an external function as shown the JavaScript version.
  // But both serves same purpose.
  public static processTabs(_compiler, _resources, node: HTMLElement, instruction: BehaviorInstruction) {
    // first create 2 templates for the replaceable parts
    const headerTemplate = document.createElement("template");
    headerTemplate.setAttribute("replace-part", "header");
    const contentTemplate = document.createElement("template");
    contentTemplate.setAttribute("replace-part", "content");

    // process all tabs
    const tabs = Array.from(node.querySelectorAll("tab"));
    for (let i = 0; i < tabs.length; i++) {
      const tab = tabs[i];

      // add header
      const header = document.createElement("button");
      header.setAttribute("click.delegate", `showTab('${i}')`);
      header.innerText = tab.getAttribute("header");
      headerTemplate.content.appendChild(header);

      // add content
      const content = document.createElement("div");
      content.setAttribute("show.bind", `activeTabId=='${i}'`);
      content.append(...Array.from(tab.childNodes));
      contentTemplate.content.appendChild(content);

      node.removeChild(tab);
    }

    // Activate the first tab
    const bindingEngine: BindingEngine = Container.instance.get(BindingEngine);
    instruction.attributes = {
      ...instruction.attributes,
      "active-tab-id": bindingEngine.createBindingExpression("activeTabId", "'0'")
    };

    node.append(headerTemplate, contentTemplate);
    return true;
  }

  @bindable public activeTabId: string;
  public showTab(tabId: string) { this.activeTabId = tabId; }
}
```

The `processTabs` method used in `@processContent` may look overwhelming, but it's mostly pure DOM manipulation. The function takes four arguments, out of which `node` holds the DOM fragment for `<tabs>...</tabs>` used in `app.html`. And then in this function, we transforms the original DOM fragment to something like below.

```HTML
<tabs>
  <template replace-part="header">
    <button click.delegate="showTab('0')">Top Movies</button>
    <button click.delegate="showTab('1')">Top TV Shows</button>
    <button click.delegate="showTab('2')">Recently Added</button>
  </template>
  <template replace-part="content">
    <div show.bind="activeTabId=='0'">...</div>
    <div show.bind="activeTabId=='1'">...</div>
    <div show.bind="activeTabId=='2'">...</div>
  </template>
</tabs>
```

You may have noticed that we have also used the some Aurelia syntax, such as `click.delegate`, or `show.bind`. We have even used `instruction` to bind the `@bindable activeTabId` of the `Tabs` class, by `createBindingExpression` using `BindingEngine`. This enables us to set `'0'` to `activeTabId` which in turn activates the first tab by default. However, we need to instruct Aurelia to process these instructions further which we do by `return`ing `true` at the end of the function. To keep the example simple, we have removed some non-crucial parts of the code. However, you can see the result and source code below and play with it.

[simple tab demo](https://codesandbox.io/embed/2wn1rj887r?autoresize=1&codemirror=1&fontsize=18&hidenavigation=1&module=%2Fsrc%2Ftabs.js&view=preview)

You may be thinking that "all that is okay, but how can I use my awesome custom controls?". You can definitely do that. In our example, we are packing all the child nodes of `tabs` directly into the respective content `div`. Therefore, you are absolutely free to use your awesome custom controls to compose the tab content. Let's see if we can use a custom element for the header. This seems like a good idea. As you start adding some styles to the header, it might start looking bulky and messy (as you might have seen in the code sandbox). Let's start with creating a custom element for the tab header.

```HTML tab-header.html
<template>
  <button class="btn btn-link" class.bind="isActive?'active':''" click.delegate="tabSelector()">
    ${name}
  </button>
</template>
```

```JavaScript tab-header.js
import { bindable } from "aurelia-framework";

export class TabHeader {
  @bindable tabId;
  @bindable isActive;
  @bindable name;
  @bindable tabSelector = id => {};
}
```
```TypeScript tab-header.ts [variant]
import { bindable } from "aurelia-framework";

export class TabHeader {
  @bindable public tabId: string;
  @bindable public isActive: boolean;
  @bindable public name: string;
  @bindable public tabSelector: (id: string) => void = id => {};
}
```

This is a pretty simple and straight forward custom element with couple of `@bindable`s used to display and decorate the `button` in the view. There is a `@bindable` lambda/arrow function to select the tabs. We intend to bind this value from `Tabs` so that it retains control over showing a particular tab (because you know we might want to compute the answer to life, the universe and everything there). To use this custom element in Tabs, we start by including that in `tabs.html` and replacing the `button` in `processTabs` with `tab-header`.

```HTML tabs.html
<template>
  <require from="./tab-header"></require>
  ...
</template>
```

```JavaScript tabs.js
function processTabs(compiler, resources, node, instruction) {
  ...
  for(let i = 0; i < tabs.length; i++) {
    const tab = tabs[i];

    // add header
    const header = document.createElement("tab-header");
    header.setAttribute("tab-id", `${i}`);
    header.setAttribute("name", tab.getAttribute("header"));
    header.setAttribute("is-active.bind", `activeTabId=='${i}'`);
    header.setAttribute("tab-selector.bind", `showTab('${i}')`);

    ...
  }
  ...
  return true;
}
...
```
```JavaScript tabs.ts [variant]
export class Tabs {
  public static processTabs(_compiler, resources: ViewResources, node: HTMLElement, instruction: BehaviorInstruction) {
    ...
    for(let i = 0; i < tabs.length; i++) {
      const tab = tabs[i];

      // add header
      const header = document.createElement("tab-header");
      header.setAttribute("tab-id", `${i}`);
      header.setAttribute("name", tab.getAttribute("header"));
      header.setAttribute("is-active.bind", `activeTabId=='${i}'`);
      header.setAttribute("tab-selector.bind", `showTab('${i}')`);

      ...
    }
    ...
    return true;
  }
  ...
}
```

You might expect this much to work. However, there is a caveat. When we do the DOM transformation in `processContent`, we manipulate the DOM of the parent view, in this case that is `app.html`. As we have not `require`d the `tab-header` in `app.html`, it has no idea of how to process a `tab-header` when we create a `tab-header` element in `processContent`, as it has no prior knowledge of the existence of a `tab-header` custom element. A couple of solutions include `require`ing `tab-header` in `app.html`, or registering it as a global resource. However, in both cases, the `Tabs` control looses complete control over its view. Instead, we can register the additional resource (`tab-header`) in `processTabs` as follows:

```JavaScript tabs.js
function processTabs(compiler, resources, node, instruction) {
  ...

  resources.registerElement("tab-header", instruction.type.viewFactory.resources.getElement("tab-header"));

  for(let i = 0; i < tabs.length; i++) {
    const tab = tabs[i];

    // add header
    const header = document.createElement("tab-header");
    header.setAttribute("tab-id", `${i}`);
    header.setAttribute("name", tab.getAttribute("header"));
    header.setAttribute("is-active.bind", `activeTabId=='${i}'`);
    header.setAttribute("tab-selector.bind", `showTab('${i}')`);

    ...
  }
  ...
  return true;
}
...
```
```JavaScript tabs.ts [variant]
import { BehaviorInstruction, bindable, BindingEngine, Container, processContent, ViewResources } from "aurelia-framework";

export class Tabs {
  public static processTabs(_compiler, resources: ViewResources, node: HTMLElement, instruction: BehaviorInstruction) {
    ...
    resources.registerElement("tab-header", instruction.type.viewFactory.resources.getElement("tab-header"));

    for(let i = 0; i < tabs.length; i++) {
      const tab = tabs[i];

      // add header
      const header = document.createElement("tab-header");
      header.setAttribute("tab-id", `${i}`);
      header.setAttribute("name", tab.getAttribute("header"));
      header.setAttribute("is-active.bind", `activeTabId=='${i}'`);
      header.setAttribute("tab-selector.bind", `showTab('${i}')`);

      ...
    }
    ...
    return true;
  }
  ...
}
```

This registration works because by the time Aurelia calls the `processContent` function, the view of the custom element is already compiled. Thus, at this point Aurelia knows which view resources are needed by the custom element itself. In our case, it knows that `Tabs` needs `TabHeader`, as we `require`d that in `tabs.html`. Therefore, the last thing to do is to register the `tab-header` element, so that `app` also knows about this. You can check out the complete code and the result in the embedded sandbox below. The lines of code in this version might be more than the simpler version with `button`, but now you know how to use your own custom element in `processContent`.

[simple tab demo](https://codesandbox.io/embed/p7wo71qrzj?autoresize=1&codemirror=1&fontsize=18&hidenavigation=1&module=%2Fsrc%2Ftabs.js&view=preview)

> Info
> Have you noted that you can register the control with a different name and use that while creating the element? So, it is possible to alias your `tab-header` as `zaphod-beeblebrox`. Fancy that!

#### Using shadow dom
A simple hello-world example showing how to scope your styles to your custom element using shadow dom.

```HTML hello-world.html
<template>
  <require from="./hello-world.css" as="scoped"></require>
  <h1>${message}</h1>
</template>
```

```CSS hello-world.css
h1 {
  color: green;
}
```

```JavaScript hello-world.js
import { useShadowDOM } from 'aurelia-framework';

@useShadowDOM()
export class HelloWorld {
  message = 'Hello World!';
}
```

```TypeScript hello-world.ts [variant]
import { useShadowDOM } from 'aurelia-framework';

@useShadowDOM()
export class HelloWorld {
  public message: string = 'Hello World!';
}
```

##### Using shadow dom in a HTML only custom component
```HTML hello-world.html
<template use-shadow-dom>
  <require from="./hello-world.css" as="scoped"></require>
  <h1>Hello World!</h1>
</template>
```
