---
name: "Templating: Dynamic UI Composition"
description: An overview of Aurelia's dynamic template composition functionality.
author: Dwayne Charrington (https://www.ilikekillnerds.com)
---

## Introduction

In this section, we are going to be learning how you can dynamically render components in your applications by utilizing Aurelia's dynamic composition functionality.

In many respects, dynamic composition closely resembles that of how Aurelia's routing works. The big exception, of course, is dynamic composition allows you to dynamically render views and view-models after the page has loaded.

When using Aurelia's `<compose>` element, inside of the view-model being used, you have access to all of Aurelia's standard view lifecycle events, such as `attached`, as well as the other callback hooks.

## Basic Composition

Using the `<compose>` element, we are going to be dynamically composing a view.

```HTML hello-world.html
<template>
  <compose view-model="./compose-me"></compose>
</template>
```

```JavaScript compose-me.js
export class ComposeMe {
}
```

```HTML compose-me.html
<template>
  <p>Hello World!!</p>
</template>
```

Inside of our `hello-world.html` template, we are using the `<compose>` element and passing through a view-model (without file extension) to be rendered. The view-model is just a standard class, like you create elsewhere in an Aurelia application.

Because Aurelia is a convention based framework, the `<compose>` element knows to use the default convention of loading the matching view for our view-model of the same name.

## Composing Without a View-Model

If you're wanting to dynamically compose just a view template without specifying a view-model, all you need to do is omit the `view-model` property and supply a `view`. The result will be that the current view-model will be used as the binding context for our view, allowing you to create HTML partials that take the current properties and methods.

```HTML hello-world.html
<template>
  <compose view="./compose-me.html"></compose>
</template>
```

```HTML compose-me.html
<template>
  <p>Hello World!!</p>
</template>
```

For the `view` property, we need to specify a file extension, unlike the view-model property, which does not have an extension. The above example will work the same way as our first example, except we're not supplying our own view-model, it's inheriting the binding context from where the `compose` element is used.

## Passing Through Data

Using what we learned above, we can dynamically compose view-models and views and pass through additional data via the `model` property on the `<compose>` element.

We are going to be building an example which will dynamically render a view/view-model pair and accept an object of provided values.

```JavaScript hello-world.js
 export class HelloWorld {
    constructor() {
      this.data = {
        name: 'John Doe',
        company: 'Cool Co.',
        likes: ['Javascript', 'fruit', 'jelly']
      };
    }
}
```
```TypeScript hello-world.ts [variant]
export class HelloWorld {
  private data = {
    name: 'John Doe',
    company: 'Cool Co.',
    likes: ['Javascript', 'fruit', 'jelly']
  };
}
```

```HTML hello-world.html
<template>
  <compose view-model="./compose-me" model.bind="data"></compose>
</template>
```

```JavaScript compose-me.js
export class ComposeMe {
  activate(model) {
    this.data = model;
  }
}
```
```TypeScript compose-me.ts [variant]
export class ComposeMe {
  private data: any = {};

  activate(model) {
    this.data = model;
  }
}
```

If you have worked with the Aurelia router before and router parameters, you will notice we obtain the provided model object the same way: as the first argument of the `activate` method. We then store the object on our class itself, making it available in our HTML view under a property called `data`.

```HTML compose-me.html
<template>
  <p>Hello, my name is ${data.name} and my company is ${data.company}.</p>
  <p>My likes include:</p>
  <ol>
    <li repeat.for="like of data.likes">${like}</li>
  </ol>
</template>
```

Notice how we are referencing values on our provided object, `name` and `company`, and then looping over an array of provided strings for `likes`.

> Info
> While the full view lifecycle (created, bind, attached, detached, unbind) is supported during dynamic composition, the full navigation lifecycle is not. Only the `activate` hook is enabled. It receives a single parameter which is the `model` and can optionally return a promise if executing an asynchronous task.

## Reusing an Existing View Model

if a change occurs in the bounded model while the view-model remains the same, aurelia will reuse the same instance of view-model and will only call functions of the component lifecycle (e.g `activate`). in some scenarios you may want to create a new instance f the `view-model` each time a change occurs in the model.
you can control this behavior by implementing `determineActivationStrategy` in your view-model.

Available return values are:
* replace
* invoke-lifecycle. [this is the default value]

`replace` does not re-use the existing view-model, i.e. you get a new instance. This is less performant but if your view model builds up local state, you will have a clean start.

`invoke-lifecycle` means, invoke the component lifecycle. Aurelia then re-uses the view-model and (only) calls the activate callbacks on the same instance - when switching from one model to another. This is efficient, but might surprise developers, because the view-model instance is not in a clean state.

> Info
> Alternatively, if the strategy is always the same and you don't want that to be in your view model code, you can also pass the `activationStrategy` property as a binding on your compose element instead.

```HTML hello-world.html
<template>
  <compose view-model="./compose-me" model.bind="data" activation-strategy="replace"></compose>
</template>
```

or

```HTML hello-world.html
<template>
  <compose view-model="./compose-me" model.bind="data" activation-strategy.bind="myActivationStrategy"></compose>
</template>
```