---
name: Setup Docker
description: If you're interested in getting started with Docker to build projects, this article will take you through setting up both your machine and a production quality starter project.
author: Saeed Ganji (http://shahabganji.me)
---
## Introduction

The emergence of containers have been changing the software culture; developers and companies are embracing DevOps and CI/CD to automate build, test, and deployment of their products. If your interested in how you can containerize your Aurelia application you are in the right place.

The tendency in the market is toward [`microservices`](https://martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html) and the culture of [`DevOps`](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/DevOpsCulture.html). These two brings the collaboration of development and operational teams, and make a huge system into lightweight independently deployable parts. Besides it helps us to run our aurelia application on the production, stage, and test machines the same way we run it on our very own laptop or computer. Besides, it would be more desirable to be able to deliver release of our front-end service with ease and confidence by taking advantage of `CI/CD` pipelines, just the same way we do for the backend services.



## Configuring Your Environment

So far you saw how to build your application using [Webpack]() and [CLI-Bundler](), to build an Aurelia application inside a `docker container` you need to have it installed on our machine. Please checkout [here](https://docs.docker.com/v18.03/install/) to get docker installed on your machine and learn how to install it. Run the following command to see information about your docker engine.

## Basic Sample

To start let's create an aurelia application, then inside the root folder create a Dockerfile with the name `Dockerfile` like the following:

```Dockerfile
# use latest version of nodejs
FROM node:lts-alpine

# install aurelia-cli to build the app & http-server to serve static contents
RUN npm i -g http-server
RUN npm i -g aurelia-cli

# set working directory to app, henceforth all command will run inside this folder
WORKDIR /app

# copy package.json related files first and install all required dependencies
COPY package*.json ./
RUN npm install

# copy the rest of files and folders & install dependencies
COPY . ./
RUN npm run build

# by default http-server will serve contents on port 8080, so we expose this port to host machine
EXPOSE 8080

CMD [ "http-server" , "dist" ]
```

Okay, I think the comments on top of each step is self-explanatory, however, there might be a question whether why we have separated the `copy` steps into two separate steps, that's due mainly to cache mechanism of docker engine. read [this](https://blog.docker.com/2019/07/intro-guide-to-dockerfile-best-practices/) article and [documentation](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/dockerfile_best-practices/) site of docker for better understanding.

Well, it's time to build our first Aurelia application image by running a `docker` command:

```bash
docker build -t aurelia-basic-docker-app:1 .
```

After the image is built successfully it's time to run our application inside a container:

```bash
docker run -it --rm -p 8080:8080 aurelia-basic-docker-app:1
```

Open the browser and hit [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080), awesome, you now have a running app.

## More real world scenario

There are some flaws with the previous approach, it is too simple for the production; no one uses `http-server` for their production environment, hopefully :wink:. And it is recommended to separate build stage and publish stage to reduce both dependencies and finale image size. If you are interested in Multi-staged builds with docker checkout the documentations [here](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/multistage-build/).

let's change a bit our `Dockerfile`, ready?

```Dockerfile
# use latest version of nodejs
FROM node:lts-alpine as build-stage

# install aurelia-cli to build the app & http-server to serve static contents
RUN npm i -g http-server
RUN npm i -g aurelia-cli

# set working directory to app, henceforth all command will run inside this folder
WORKDIR /app

# copy package.json related files first and install all required dependencies
COPY package*.json ./
RUN npm install

# copy the rest of files and folders & install dependencies
COPY . ./
RUN npm run build

# use nginx as the http server to serve contents
FROM nginx:alpine as production-stage
WORKDIR /usr/share/nginx/html
# copy files from previous container/stage into the new one, from /app/dist to working directory
COPY --from=build-stage /app/dist ./
EXPOSE 80
CMD ["nginx", "-g", "daemon off;"]" ]
```

You already knew how to create your docker image, yes, that's the command:

```bash
docker build -t aurelia-prod-docker-app:1 .
```

After the image is built successfully it's time to run our application inside a container:

```bash
docker run -it --rm -p 8080:80 aurelia-prod-docker-app:1
```

OK, we used the old pattern of separation of concerns, we give each stage/step its own responsibility, the first stage will build our application and has its own dependencies, and the second one uses the output provided by the previous one to serve the requests coming to the http server, in this case nginx. Hit the browser ( [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) ) to see the result.

> Info
> Don't forget to read official documents of docker for [multi-staged builds](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/multistage-build/) and the [docker file best practices](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/dockerfile_best-practices/). Besides you could also find a wealth of fruitful articles around the subject matter.

So far so good, the most intriguing part is that `aurelia-cli` will generate a `Dockerfile` based on your chosen configuration, if you go through the `Custom App` installation. If you do so, there are a simple command to build an image

```bash
npm run docker:build
```

that will build a production-ready docker image for you and you could bring up a container on your local machine by simply running:

```bash
npm run docker:start
```

guess which command to run to stop the container:

```bash
npm run docker:stop
```



