---
name: Handling Links
description: This article covers Aurelia's default behavior on handling links.
author: Chunpeng Huo (https://github.com/huochunpeng)
---
## Basic Concept
When you use Aurelia router in your app, most links (in `<a>` elements) are processed by Aurelia without triggering a traditional full page reload. This is a fundamental feature of any SPA (Single Page Application) framework.

Aurelia achieves this with [`DefaultLinkHandler`](https://github.com/aurelia/history-browser/blob/master/src/link-handler.ts) in `aurelia-history-browser`.

It basically registered a global `click` event handler to hijack click on `<a>` elements, then does front-end navigation instead of default browser behavior which is a full page reload.

## Skipping Click Hijacking
By default, the `DefaultLinkHandler` skips click hijacking in following situations.

### 1. if it's not clicking primary button (left button for right-handed).

### 2. if any of `Alt`/`Ctrl`/`Meta`/`Shift` keys is pressed.

### 3. if the href on `<a>` element starts with `#` (link to local hash), or it's a full url like `http://...` or `ftp://...`.

### 4. if the `<a>` has a `target` attribute and it is not targeting the current window.
```HTML
<a href="/some/link" target="_blank">Skip Hijacking</a>

<a href="/some/link">Does Not Skip</a>
<a href="/some/link" target="_self">Does Not Skip</a>
<a href="/some/link" target="name-of-current-window">Does Not Skip</a>
```

### 5. if the `<a>` has special attribute `download`, or `router-ignore`, or `data-router-ignore`.
```HTML
<a href="/some/link" download>Skip Hijacking</a>
<a href="/some/link" download="">Skip Hijacking</a>
<a href="/some/link" router-ignore>Skip Hijacking</a>
<a href="/some/link" router-ignore="">Skip Hijacking</a>
<a href="/some/link" data-router-ignore>Skip Hijacking</a>
<a href="/some/link" data-router-ignore="">Skip Hijacking</a>
```

## Conditional Skipping Click Hijacking
The `data-router-ignore` is introduced to play nice with another Aurelia feature: automatic data attribute creation.

> Info
> You might have already used this Aurelia feature without notice. This feature is why you can do `<span data-placement.bind="tooHigh ? 'bottom' : 'top'" data-toggle="tooltip" title="lorem">test</span>` with bootstrap.

```HTML
<a href="/some/link" data-router-ignore.bind="condition || null">Conditional Skip Hijacking</a>
```
Here Aurelia will dynamically add/remove attribute `data-router-ignore` when condition changes. Note `|| null` is necessary because Aurelia only removes the data attribute when the bound value becomes `null` or `undefined`, it doesn't remove the data attribute when bound value is `0` or `""` or even `false`.

In comparison, `<a href="/some/link" router-ignore.bind="condition || null">Does not work</a>` does NOT add/remove attribute `router-ignore`. Aurelia only does that for `data-` or `aria-` attributes.
